# Chunked encryption

https://c2sp.org/chunked-encryption

This document specifies a mechanism to encrypt a large *message* of up to 16
PiB, allowing authenticated streaming encryption and decryption, and
authenticated random access with predictable mapping of plaintext and ciphertext
indices.

It has similar purpose to [STREAM][] and [FLOE][], but is closer in its design
to the [TLS 1.3][] record layer, with a key derivation step that includes key
commitment.

If instantiated with an AEAD having a tag length of 16 bytes, this scheme has a
fixed overhead of 56 bytes and a marginal overhead of approximately 0.1%.

## Specification

At a high level, for each *message* a single-use random *key*, *base nonce*, and
*commitment* are generated with HKDF-Expand from an *input key*, *salt*, and
*context*. The message is split into 16 KiB chunks, with the last chunk being
always shorter. Each chunk is then encrypted with an AEAD, the *key*, and the
*base nonce* XOR’d with a chunk counter.

### Key derivation

This scheme is instantiated with an HKDF-Expand hash function, and an AEAD which
encrypts messages with a *key* of *len(key)* bytes and a *nonce* of *len(nonce)*
bytes. Applications and protocols SHOULD select a single hash and a single AEAD
for use with each high-level application or protocol version.

Absent other requirements, the use of SHA-256 and AES-128-GCM is RECOMMENDED.

For each message, a tuple of unique, uniformly random *key*, *base nonce*, and
*commitment* are derived from an *input key* of *len(key)* bytes (i.e. the same
key size as the underlying AEAD) with HKDF-Expand.

`||` denotes concatenation. `0x` followed by two hexadecimal characters denotes
a byte value in the 0-255 range. A string surrounded by `"` is encoded as ASCII.

```
key || base nonce || commitment = HKDF-Expand(prk = input key, 
    info = "c2sp.org/chunked-encryption@v1+" || aead || 0x00 || salt || context)
```

The *input key* MUST be uniformly random, e.g. generated by a CSPRNG or output
by a KDF.

*aead* is the name of the underlying AEAD, from the [AEAD Algorithms IANA
registry][], like `AEAD_AES_128_GCM`.

*salt* is a sequence of 24 bytes that MUST NOT repeat for a certain *input key*,
and that SHOULD be randomly generated. It MUST be prepended to the final message
ciphertext, before the *commitment*.

*context* is application provided additional data, and it MAY be empty.

*key* and *base nonce* MUST be of *len(key)* and *len(nonce)* bytes
respectively.

*commitment* MUST be of 32 bytes, and MUST be prepended to the ciphertext, after
the *salt*. When decrypting, implementations MUST check the *commitment* matches
the derived value before continuing.

### Message chunking

The message is split into chunks of 16 KiB, except the final chunk which MUST be
shorter than 16 KiB, and MAY be empty. Note that there is only one correct
chunking for each message length. For example:

- An empty message is encrypted as a single empty chunk.
- A message of 1 KiB is encrypted as a single chunk of 1 KiB.
- A message of 16 KiB is encrypted as two chunks, one of 16 KiB and one empty.
- A message of 20 KiB is encrypted as two chunks, one of 16 KiB and one of 4
  KiB.

When decrypting, the implementation MUST check that the final chunk is shorter
than 16 KiB, and consider the message truncated otherwise.

The chunks are numbered from zero, and the message MUST NOT exceed 2⁴⁰ chunks
(16 PiB). If the chunk counter reaches or exceeds 2⁴⁰ while encrypting or
decrypting, implementations MUST abort. Implementations MAY limit the chunk
count to a lower number, but SHOULD NOT apply a limit lower than 2³² (64 TiB).

### AEAD usage

Each chunk MUST be encrypted/decrypted with the AEAD using the *key* and a
*nonce* derived as the XOR of the *base nonce* and the chunk number as a
big-endian integer as wide as the *base nonce*. (Equivalently, the final 5 bytes
of the *base nonce* are XOR’d with the chunk number as a big-endian 40-bit
integer.)

The AEAD’s AAD is not used and MUST be empty.

The final ciphertext MUST be the concatenation of *salt*, *commitment*, and the
AEAD ciphertexts.

## Implementation notes

A streaming encryption implementation needs only buffer 16 KiB of input and can
flush that buffer into an encrypted chunk immediately once the buffer fills up.
When the message terminates, the buffer must be flushed into a final short
encrypted chunk, even if the buffer is empty.

After checking the commitment, a streaming decryption implementation needs to
read multiples of `16 KiB + len(tag)`, where `len(tag)` is usually 16, and
decrypt them and authenticate them before making the plaintext available to the
application. Upon reaching the end of the ciphertext, it must decrypt the final
chunk, which must have encrypted length between `len(tag)` and `16 KiB +
len(tag) - 1`. Otherwise, it must return a message truncation error.

A random access decryption implementation may choose to authenticate the message
length at any point by calculating the offset of the last chunk, checking its
encrypted length is between `len(tag)` and `16 KiB + len(tag) - 1`, and
decrypting it. This check must be performed if the application requests a seek
offset relative to the end of the message. All decryption implementations must
check the commitment before decrypting any chunk.

A plaintext index `i` can be found at index `i % 16384` of chunk `i // 16384`.
Chunk `k` can be found at ciphertext offset `56 + k * (16384 + len(tag))`.

Note that not all message ciphertext lengths are valid, in particular any
message of encrypted length `56 + k * (16 KiB + len(tag))` is truncated, and any
message of encrypted length < 56, or > `56 + k * (16 KiB + len(tag))` and <
`56 + k * (16 KiB + len(tag)) + len(tag)` is invalid. Pay attention not to
assume that the final encrypted chunk is always > `len(tag)`, as that can cause
panics or memory errors.

## FIPS 140 compliance

Two components of this scheme are in scope for FIPS 140-3 compliance: the key
derivation and the AEAD.

The key derivation uses an Approved Feedback Mode KDF from [NIST SP 800-108 Rev.
1 Upd. 1], as explained in [The FIPS Compliance of HKDF][].

A FIPS 140-3 compliant AEAD must be selected, such as AES-GCM. It can be shown
that the key and nonce derivation employed by this scheme fully satisfies the SP
800-38D universal pair uniqueness requirement even if 2⁷⁶ full-length messages
are encrypted. (See the birthday bound analysis below.) However, most FIPS 140-3
modules and NVLAP-accredited labs only accept schemes that comply with the
relaxed requirements of Implementation Guidance C.H. This scheme can be used
with a XOR’d counter-based nonce scheme complying with IG C.H Scenario 3, with a
nonce scheme intended for use with TLS 1.3 complying with IG C.H Scenario 1.a,
or with a nonce scheme intended for use with HPKE or with this specification
complying with IG C.H Scenario 5. These are all equivalent and for example the
FIPS 140-3 Go Cryptographic Module v1.26.0 provides all three as different APIs
for the same implementation.

## Security analysis

Aside from the truncation protection, this scheme is essentially identical to
the TLS 1.3 record layer, and benefits from its extensive security analysis. In
particular, see [ePrint 2018/993][] for a multi-target analysis, and [ePrint
2024/051][] for a single-key analysis of AEAD limits.

However, we can also provide a simpler, more conservative analysis.

At the AEAD level, we need to show that (key, nonce) pairs have a low chance of
colliding. Even assuming a worst case scenario in which every message has length
16 PiB, exhausting the 40-bit counter space in the nonce, and the AEAD has a key
size of 128 bits and nonce size of 96 bits, that leaves 128 + 96 - 40 = 184 bits
of uniformly random space. Since the counter occupies at most the low-order 40
bits, the remaining 56 bits of the base nonce are invariant across chunks within
a message and can’t collide unless the whole base nonce collides. That produces
a birthday bound of 2⁷⁶ messages for a chance of collision of 2⁻³².

For the multi-target setting, again assuming a worst case scenario of 16 PiB
messages, 128-bit keys, and 96-bit nonces, this scheme provides 128 + 96 - 40 -
64 = 120 bits of security against an attacker which targets 2⁶⁴ messages. Each
“effective” nonce (the prefix unaffected by the counter) is reused by (on
average) 2⁶⁴ / 2⁵⁶ = 2⁸ users, producing an effort to succeed of 2¹²⁸⁻⁸. See
Section 1.1 of [ePrint 2018/993][].

At the block mode level, counter modes have a wearout limit of
2<sup>48.5</sup> blocks, or ~5.6 PiB for 128-bit ciphers like AES, for an
attacker advantage of 2⁻³². See Equation (7) of [ePrint 2024/051][]. A full-size
message of 16 PiB provides the attacker with an advantage of 2⁻²⁹, which is
still small and would require an impractical amount of resources. Applications
may nonetheless choose to limit message size to e.g. 4 PiB by limiting the chunk
counter to 2³⁸ instead of 2⁴⁰.

At the key derivation level, using random 192-bit salts has a birthday bound of
2⁸⁰ messages for a chance of collision of 2⁻³², which exceeds the derived key +
base nonce birthday bound of 2⁷⁶. The HKDF internal state is sufficient not to
be the bottleneck even if SHA-256 is in use. The commitment provides a
verification oracle for the input key and salt, but since their combined space
(128 + 192 = 320 bits in the worst case) exceeds the derived key and base nonce
space (128 + 96 - 40 = 184 bits in the worst case), it does not become the
bottleneck for multi-target security.

The 32-byte key commitment provides 128 bits of key commitment security.

The HKDF-Expand info field is encoded as a parseable sequence of a fixed-length
prefix, a variable-length AEAD name terminated with a zero byte, a fixed-length
salt, and a variable-length context. Using a `c2sp.org` prefix minimizes the
risk of collision with other HKDF-Expand uses.

As for the truncation (and extension) protection, in order to forge a message
length the attacker would need to produce a (*nonce*, *ciphertext*) tuple where
the *nonce* encodes counter (*length* // 16 KiB), and the *ciphertext* has
length (*len(tag)* + *length* % 16 KiB). Without violating ciphertext
unforgeability (INT-CTXT), this is only possible if such a tuple was output by
an honest encryption operation, meaning the message length is the correct one.

## Rationale

The last chunk is required to be short, which implicitly acts as the
end-of-message signal. The alternative, allowing a full final chunk and
disallowing an empty final chunk, has multiple disadvantages: it requires an
explicit final chunk flag in the nonce or AD; it forces a streaming decryption
implementation to do trial decryptions or look-ahead to determine if a chunk is
final or not; it requires extra buffering (push-based) or overread (pull-based)
on the encryption side, even if the application makes inputs available in
otherwise optimal chunk-sized spans; and finally it requires an exception to
allow an empty chunk for empty messages.

Padding and variable chunk sizes are not supported, to allow random access
decryption with a predictable mapping of plaintext indices.

The chunk size was chosen to match the TLS 1.3 record size. This has a few
advantages: systems can be expected to be capable to decrypt chunks whole if
they can do the same for TLS 1.3; we get to reuse more easily some security
bound analysis; and implementations are likely to be tested and optimized at
that size. The selected chunk size provides marginal overhead (< 0.1%) and a
maximum message size that exceeds the key wearout limit of a 128-bit block
cipher in CTR mode.

The maximum chunk count is selected such that it doesn’t impose any further
limit on the size of a message beyond the key wearout limit of a 128-bit block
cipher in CTR mode, while protecting enough nonce space to make the birthday
bound and multi-target security analysis of 128-bit keys straightforward.

The nonce is generated along with the key to extend the birthday and
multi-target bounds of AEADs with 128-bit keys. The counter is XOR’d with the
nonce instead of concatenated to provide additional practical multi-target
security beyond the conservative analysis (which assumes the counter space is
exhausted in every message), and to match the TLS 1.3 and HPKE designs, in order
to reuse their security analysis such as [ePrint 2018/993][].

The AEAD’s AAD is not used because context can already be bound into the key
derivation step. (This part may change in a future version if a strong reason
presents itself. For example, this requires context to be known before
encryption starts.)

The key derivation uses HKDF-Expand without the Extract step to comply with NIST
SP 800-108, and because the input key for an encryption API can be presumed to
be uniformly random already.

## Appendix: raw mode

If this scheme is used in the context of a higher-level protocol, the *key* and
*base nonce* MAY be generated using its existing key derivation and domain
separation facilities, instead of using the specified HKDF-Expand invocation.

The *key* and *base nonce* MUST be both uniformly random, not just
non-repeating, so for example the *base nonce* MUST NOT be produced by directly
encoding a counter. They MUST NOT be reused for multiple messages.

*key* and *base nonce* SHOULD be generated as one long key of length *len(key)* +
*len(nonce)* and SHOULD be derived via a KDF from either a non-repeating
message counter or from a random value of 192 bits or more.

If this mode is used, no *salt* or *commitment* is prepended to the final
ciphertext, and no key commitment is provided by this layer.

Libraries SHOULD NOT expose this mode to applications: it should either be
implemented internally by higher-level libraries as a component of the
higher-level protocol, or exposed as a “hazmat” primitive meant for implementing
protocols.

The ciphertext offset and validity formulas in the implementation notes must be
adjusted to remove the 56-byte prefix when implementing raw mode.

[STREAM]: https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/189
[FLOE]: https://c2sp.org/FLOE
[TLS 1.3]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-5.2
[AEAD Algorithms IANA registry]: https://www.iana.org/assignments/aead-parameters/aead-parameters.xhtml#aead-parameters-2
[NIST SP 800-108 Rev. 1 Upd. 1]: https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/108/r1/upd1/final
[The FIPS Compliance of HKDF]: https://words.filippo.io/fips-hkdf/
[ePrint 2018/993]: https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/993
[ePrint 2024/051]: https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/051
